Abstract
The cellular prion protein (PrPC) is a central player in neurodegenerative diseases caused by
protein misfolding, such as prion diseases or Alzheimer`s disease (AD). Expression levels of
this GPI-anchored glycoprotein, especially at the neuronal cell surface, critically correlate
with various pathomechanistic aspects underlying these diseases, such as templated
misfolding (in prion diseases) and neurotoxicity and, hence, with disease progression and
severity. In stark contrast to cell-associated PrPC, soluble extracellular forms or fragments of
PrP are linked with neuroprotective effects, which is likely due to their ability to interfere with
neurotoxic disease-associated protein conformers in the interstitial fluid. Fittingly, the
endogenous proteolytic release of PrPC by the metalloprotease ADAM10 (‘shedding’) was
characterized as a protective mechanism. Here, using a recently generated cleavage-site
specific antibody, we shed new light on earlier studies by demonstrating that shed PrP (sPrP)
negatively correlates with conformational conversion (in prion disease) and is markedly
redistributed in murine brain in the presence of prion deposits or AD-associated amyloid
plaques indicating a blocking and sequestrating activity. Importantly, we reveal that
administration of certain PrP-directed antibodies and other ligands results in increased PrP
shedding in cells and organotypic brain slice cultures. We also provide mechanistic and
structural insight into this shedding-stimulating effect. In addition, we identified a striking
exception to this, as one particular neuroprotective antibody, due to its special binding
characteristics, did not cause increased shedding but rather strong surface clustering
followed by fast endocytosis and degradation of PrPC. Both mechanisms may contribute to
the beneficial action described for some PrP-directed antibodies/ligands and pave the way
for new therapeutic strategies against devastating and currently incurable neurodegenerative
diseases. 

Абстракт
ПрП - это центральный виновник в нейродегенеративных заболеваниях, вызванных дисконформацией протеиной, таких как прионные болезни и синдром Альцгеймера (СА). Уровни экспресси данного GPI-заякоренного гликопротеина, особенно на поверхности нейронов, критически коррелирует с различными патомеханистическами аспектами данных болезней, таких как шаблонная дисконформация в прионных заболевания и нейротоксичностью, а значит и с общим течением болезни и ее тяжестью. На контрасте с клеточным ПрП, внеклеточный растворимый "дикий" ПрПС имеет, вероятно, нейропротекторный эффект, скорее всего из-за способности вмешиваться в нейротоксичные ассоциированные с заболеваниями конформеры в межклеточной жидкости. В подтверждение этому, эндогенные протеолитический выброс ПрПС металлопротеазой АДАМ10 (так называемое "осыпание") было охарактеризовано как защитный механизм. В данном исследовании, используя недавно найденные специфичные к месту отреза антитела, мы проливаем свет на предыдущие исследования, демонстрируя, что осыпавшийся ПрП (оПрП, опрп) негативно коррелирует с болезнетворной конформационной конвертацией (при прионных болезнях) и заметно распределен в мозге мышей при наличии прионных депозитов или СА-ассоциированных амилоидов, что показывает на блокирующую активность опрп. Что важно, мы раскрываем, что введение определенных ПрП-направленных антител или других лигандов, имеет результатом повышенное "осыпание" ПрП в клетках и органотипических культурах среза мозгового вещества. Мы также раскрываем механистическую и структурную природу этого эффекта, который стимулирует осыпание.  Вдобавок к этому, мы нашли серьезное исключение к обнаруженному нами правилу, так как одно отдельное нейропротективное антитело, из-за специфических свойств присоединения, не усилило осыпание, а наоборот усилие поверхностную агрегацию и последующий за ним быстрый эндоцитоз и деградацию ПрПС. Оба механизма вносят позитивный вклад и дают инсайты для новых терапевтических стратегий.

Introduction

Введение

Нейродегенеративные заболевания, такие как СА и Паркинсон (СП), а также менее распространенные прионные заболевания, не только имеют общий механизм мисфорлдинга протеинов, агрегации протеинов и прогрессирующей природы заболеваний, но также включают общие молекулы посредники. Один пример - ПрПС, высококонсервативный гликопротеин  на поверхности клетки с высокой экспрессией в нервной системе.

Кроме своих физиологических функций, ПрПС играет ключевую роль в прионных заболеваниях человека и животных. При течении этих инфекционных болезней, ПрПС дисконформируется в скрепи-форму ПрПСк, стойкую к протеазе К. Причиной тому либо случай, либо мутации в гене ПРНП, либо контакт с ПрПСк. В последнем случае скрепи-формы играют роль зачатков-шаблонов для последующей дисконформации здоровых протеинов. С недавних пор, был обнаружен GPI-заякоренный ПрПС, в качестве важного рецептора на поверхности клетки для нейротоксичных олигомеров, богатых бета-листами, таких, как скрепи-форма, бета-амилоидный пептид и тау- и альфа-синуклеин, которые вызывают прионные заболевания, СА, таупатии и СП, соответственно. 
Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer`s (AD) and Parkinson`s disease (PD) as
well as less frequent prion diseases, not only share mechanisms of protein misfolding,
protein aggregation and progressive spreading of pathology [1-3], but also involve common
molecular players [4, 5]. One example is the cellular prion protein (PrPC), a highly conserved
cell surface glycoprotein with high (yet not exclusive) expression in the nervous system [6].
Apart from its physiological functions, PrPC plays a key role in prion diseases of humans (e.g.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)) and animals (e.g. chronic wasting disease in elk and deer;
bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle). In these transmissible diseases, PrPC misfolds
into a pathogenic and partially proteinase K (PK)-resistant conformation (PrPSc) [7, 8] due to
either (i) a sporadic event, (ii) mutations in the coding Prn-p gene (causing genetic/familial
disease forms) or (iii) contact with infectious “prions” (i.e., misfolded PrP species acting as
“seeds” to template further PrPC misfolding in acquired forms) [9]. More recently, GPIanchored PrPC has emerged as an important cell surface receptor for neurotoxic oligomers of
β-sheet-rich peptides/proteins [6, 10-14] such as PrPSc itself, Aβ, tau and α-synuclein, which
are all mediators of neuronal dysfunction found in neurodegenerative diseases such as prion
diseases, AD, tauopathies, and PD, respectively [14, 15]. The plasma membrane is the
primary site for the detrimental interactions of such extracellular toxic conformers with the
disordered N-terminal part of signaling-competent PrPC [16-18]. This binding causes
synapto- and neurotoxic signaling (enabled by certain transmembrane proteins associating
with PrPC [19, 20]) and, in the case of PrPSc seeds, subsequent templated misfolding of
native PrPC. In prion diseases, the survival time is inversely correlated with PrPC
 expression
 
 
 
Плазматическая мембрана - основное место для пагубного взаимодействия таких токсичных внеклеточных конформеров с неупорядоченным N-концом сигнально-компетентного ПрПС. Это взаимодействие вызывает синаптическое и нейротоксичное сигналирование (которое становится возможным благодаря некоторым трансмембранным протеинам, ассоциированным с ПрПС), и в случае со скрепи-зачатками, последующее дисконформирование ПрПС по шаблону. В прионных заболеваниях, выживаемость негативно коррелирует с экспрессией ПрПС.
 
 
levels [21, 22]. For these reasons, approaches to lower total or cell surface PrPC levels are
considered as promising therapeutic options with potential benefit also in the other
abovementioned protein misfolding diseases [23-28].

По этим причинам, подходы к уменьшению общих уровней и поверхностных уровней экспресии ПрПс считаются перспективными терапевтическими стратегиями. 

Следует заметить, что поверхностные уровни ПрПс сильно регулируются различными клаточными механизмами. Среди них - протеолитическое разрезание и внеклеточный выброс (осыпание) при помощи металлопротеазы АДАМ10. Последняя - еще один пример протеина, задействованного в множестве различных протеинопатий: играя роль главной альфа-секретазы, АДАМ10 ответственна за не-амилоидогенную обработку амилоид-бета-протеина-прекурсора (АПП), таким образом конкурентно сражаясь за генерацию токсичных БА. Таким образом, АДАМ10 была предложена в качестве терапии при СА. Также, понижая уровни поверхностного ПрПС, стимулирование АДАМ10 ухудшает биндинг БА к нейронам и таким образом понижает токсичность. В экспериментальных прионных заболеваниях у мышей, АДАМ10 похожим образом защищает от заболевания, так как его экспрессия коррелирует с выживаемостью. В последнюю очередь, после релизинга с поверхности, опрп, который имеет все нужные сайты для биндинга, может вмешиваться в формирование скрепи-формы и заблокировать или нейтрализовать различные токсичные конформеры во внеклеточном пространстве. Похожие эффекты были также описаны для рекомбинантной и безъякорьной форм ПрП, искусственных ПрП-димеров, или из растворимым N-терминальным фрагментом, что есть результат конститутивного альфа-разреза в середине ПрПС., что можно считать аналогами опрп.
Of note, surface levels of PrPC are tightly regulated by various cellular mechanisms [29].
Among those is the proteolytic cleavage and extracellular release (shedding) by the
metalloproteinase ADAM10 [30-32]. The latter is yet another example of a protein with
relevance in different proteinopathies: Acting as the main ‘α-secretase’, ADAM10 is
responsible for the non-amyloidogenic processing of the amyloid-β precursor protein (APP),
thus competing with the generation of toxic Aβ in the first place. As such, it has been
proposed and investigated as a potential target in AD therapy [33-36]. Furthermore, by also
lowering surface PrPC levels, ADAM10 stimulation impairs the binding of Aβ to neurons and
thus reduces toxicity [28]. In experimental prion diseases in mice, ADAM10 similarly confers
protection as its expression correlates with survival time [37, 38]. Lastly, once being released
from the surface, shed PrP (sPrP), which possesses all relevant binding sites, may interfere
with PrPSc formation (in prion diseases) and block or neutralize various toxic conformers in
the extracellular space [39]. Similar effects have already been described for recombinant or
anchorless PrP versions, artificial PrP dimers, or the soluble N-terminal fragment (N1)
resulting from the constitutive α-cleavage in the middle of PrPC [11, 40-47], which may all be
considered as a proxy for physiologically acting bona fide sPrP.


Для поддержания этой идеи, мы предоставляем данные, полученные из мышиных моделей, показывающие, что физиологический опрп имеет нейропротекторный эффект. Поэтому мы и предлагаем АДАМ10 как потенциальный терапевтический агент в СА. Однако АДАМ10 задействован во множестве физиологических путей, влияет на множество субстратов и имеет широкий спектр действия.

Таким образом, прямо манипулировать уровнями этой протеазы может вызвать серьезные побочные эффекты, в то время как субстрат-специфичный подход к стимулированию АДАМ10-специфичного осыпания ПрПС.

In support of this, we here
provide data obtained with murine disease models indicating that physiologically sPrP acts
protective in neurodegenerative diseases by blocking and sequestering toxic oligomers.
When considering new treatment options against currently incurable diseases: why not
utilizing a potentially protective process already provided by nature? While ADAM10 has
been suggested as a therapeutic target in AD [33, 35], apparent problems arise from its
rather broad expression pattern, the multitude of substrates in different tissues, and its
involvement in various important physiological and pathological processes ranging from
development and tissue homeostasis to intercellular communication and cancer [36, 48].

Therefore, directly manipulating this protease may cause significant side-effects, whereas a
substrate-specific approach to stimulate the ADAM10-mediated shedding of PrPC would
likely be superior.

Базируясь на более ранних идеях о повышенной активности АДАМ10 при димеризации или присоединении к специфичному антителу, и защитные свойства ПрПС-направленных антител в различным моделям СА и прионным заболеваниям, мы решили посмотреть, как влияют лиганды, присоединяемые к ПрПС, будут влиять на релиз АДАМ10. Мы показали, что широкий спектр
Based on two earlier yet so far independent data-based concepts of (a) an increased
ADAM10-mediated cleavage of some other ADAM10 substrates upon specific antibodybinding or dimerization [49-51], and (b) the protective effects of PrPC
-directed antibodies in
various models of Alzheimer`s and prion disease [52-66], we aimed at investigating how
ligands binding to PrPC
 would affect its supposed protective release by ADAM10. We show
that a wide range of full-length (fl) IgG antibodies binding to central epitopes of PrPC and
some other PrP-directed ligands increase the ADAM10-mediated PrP-shedding. In contrast,
a fl-IgG antibody targeting repetitive epitopes within the octarepeat region of PrPC leads to
strong PrPC surface clustering and subsequent internalization and lysosomal degradation of
the PrPC-antibody complex, whereas an identical derivative in its single-chain form increases
shedding similar to abovementioned ligands. Moreover, we provide structural insight
suggesting that shedding-stimulating effects of a PrP-directed antibody are enabled by a
moderate conformational change in the relative positioning of the N- and C-terminal halves of
PrPC.
Collectively, our data suggest that PrPC-to-ligand interactions play key roles in determining
the fate of PrPC regarding strong surface clustering followed by internalization and
degradation on the one hand, or increased ADAM10-mediated shedding on the other hand.
Both mechanisms may pave the way for novel therapeutic options against a wide range of
dementias. 
