The Heterogeneous Nature of Cu2þ Interactions
with Alzheimer's Amyloid-β Peptide

Гетерогенная природа взаимодействий иона меди с бета-амилоидным пептидом.

A lzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive cognitive and memory impairment. Within the brain, senile plaques, which
comprise extracellular deposits of the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ), are the most common
pathological feature of AD. A high concentration of Cu2þ is found within these plaques,
which are also areas under oxidative stress. Laboratory work has shown that in vitro Aβ
will react with Cu2þ to induce peptide aggregation and the production of reactive oxygen
species. As such, this interaction offers a possible explanation for two of the defining
pathological features observed in the AD brain: the presence of amyloid plaques, which
consist largely of insoluble Aβ aggregates, and the abundant oxidative stress therein.
Researchers have accordingly put forth the “metals hypothesis” of AD, which postulates
that compounds designed to inhibit Cu2þ/Aβ interactions and redistribute Cu2þ may offer
therapeutic potential for treating AD.
Characterization of the pH-dependent Cu2þ coordination of Aβ is fundamental to understanding the neurological relevance of Cu2þ/Aβ interactions and aiding the design of new therapeutic agents. In an effort to shed
light on the problem, many experimental and theoretical techniques, using a variety of model systems, have been undertaken. The
preceding decade has seen numerous conflicting spectroscopic reports concerning the nature of the Cu2þ/Aβ coordination. As the
number of studies has grown, the nature of the pH-dependent ligand environment surrounding the Cu2þ cation has remained a
point of contention. In large part, the difficulties can be attributed to inappropriate choices of the model system or to methods that
are incapable of quantitatively delineating the presence and identity of multiple Cu2þ coordination modes.
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) is the method of choice for studying paramagnetic metalprotein interactions. With
the introduction of site-specific 15N, 17O, and 13C isotopic labels and the application of advanced techniques, EPR is capable of
eliminating much of the ambiguity. 

Альцгеймер - нейродегенеративное заболевание, характеризующееся прогрессирующей утратой разума и памяти. В мозгу, бляшки внеклеточных депозитов бета-амилоидного пептида являются наиболее типичной характеристикой Альцгеймера. Высокая концентрация ионов меди была обнаружена в этих бляшках, которые также находились в состоянии окислительного стресса. Лабораторные исследования показали, что при условиях ин-витро, катионы меди взаимодействуют с бета-амилоидным пептидом и индуцируют агрегацию пептидов и высвобождение свободных радикалов. Поэтому, это взаимодействие может объяснить одну из двух главных особенностей Альцгеймера - а именно наличие бета-амилоидных бляшек, состоящих главным образом, из нерастворимых бета-амилоидных агрегатов, а также могут объяснить широкораспространенный окислительный стресс в этих бляшках.  Поэтому именно исследователи предложили металлическую гипотезу патогенеза Альцгеймера, которая постулирует, что вещества, способствующие понижению сродства катиона меди к бета-амилоидам и способствующие перераспределению катионов меди могут облегчить синдром Альцгеймера.

Характеризация (изучение) ph-зависимой координации катионами меди образования бета-амилоидных бляшек - фундаментально для понимания неврологических последствий взаимодействия катионов меди с бета-амилоидами и для выявления новых терапевтических средств, таким образом.

Чтобы изучить эту проблему, многие экспериментальные и теоретические техники были отработаны и предложены. В 2000-ых годах мир увидел множество часто взаимопротиворечащих отчетов об исследованиях этого взаимодействия. В большинстве случаев, как считается, противоречия были вызваны методологическими ошибками исследований.

Электронно-парамагнетический резонанс (ЭПР) - это стандартный метод для изучения метал-протеиновых взаимодействий.  Путем добавления сайт-специфичных изотопных маркеров 15N, 17O и 13С, ЭПР позволяет существенно сократить противоречивость выводов о природе взаимодействия катионов меди с бета-амилоидами.


Recent EPR studies have produced the most definitive picture of the pH-dependent Cu2þ
coordination modes of Aβ and enabled researchers to address the inconsistencies present in the literature.
In this Account, we begin by briefly introducing the evidence for a role of Cu2þ in AD as well as the potential physiological and
therapeutic implications of that role. We then outline the EPR methodology used to resolve the molecular details of the Cu2þ/Aβ
interactions. No drugs are currently available for altering the course of AD, and existing therapies only offer short-term
symptomatic relief. This focused picture of the role of Cu2þ in AD-related plaques offers welcome potential for the development of
new methods to combat this devastating disease.

Недавние ЭПР исследования произвели на свет наиболее ясную модель ph-зависимого медь-бетаамилоидного взаимодействия. В данном отчете, мы кратко изложим эту модель, а также укажем на возможные пути влияния на данную модель, так как средств для излечения Альцгеймера не существует.

1. Cu/Aβ interactions in Alzheimer's Disease
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common age related
neurodegenerative disease. Currently, there are no disease
modifying drugs and existing therapies only offer shortterm symptomatic relief. Two of the defining pathological
indicators of AD are the presence of extracellular amyloid
deposits, consisting primarily of the β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide

1. Медь-бетаамилоидные взаимодействия при Альцгеймере
Альцгеймер - наиболее распространенное зависимое от возраста нейродегенеративное заболевание. Против него нет лекарства, а существующие лекарства лишь приносят краткосрочную ремиссию. Два основоопределяющих свойства Альцгеймера - наличие внеклеточных бета-амилоидных депозитов

and oxidative stress.1 The 3943 amino acid Aβ peptide is
cleaved from the transmembrane amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β and γ sectretases (Figure 1A,B). While APP
possesses physiological functions, most recently being proposed to play the role of a ferroxidase in the central nervous
system,2Aβ forms neurotoxic oligomers that are likely to be
responsible for the synaptic dysfunction in AD.3 In this

и окислительный стресс. 3943 аминокислоты, составляющие бета-амилоидный пептид, вырезаются из трансмембранного амилоидного протеина-прекурсора (АПП) бета- и гамма-секретазами. В  то время как АПП имеет известные физиологические функции, из них наиболее новой обнаруженной является роль ферроксидазы в ЦНС, бета-амилоидный пептид образует нейротоксичные олигомеры, которые, вероятно, виновны в синаптической дисфункции при синдроме Альцгеймера (СА). В этом

regard, the defining features of Aβ aggregation, oxidative
stress, and neuronal cell death in AD may be explained by
the interactions of Aβ with Cu2þ. Synthetic Aβ reacts with
Cu2þ to form aggregates and generate reactive oxygen

смысле, основополагающие свойства бетаамилоидной (БА) агрегации, окислительного стресса и смерти нейронов при СА могут быть объяснены взаимодействием БА с катионами меди. Синтетические БА реагируют с катионами меди и производят реактивные кислородные соединения

species by reducing coordinated Cu2þ to Cuþ with the
concomitant oxidation of other moieties such as thiols,
ascorbate, lipids, or Aβ side chains.46 Divalent copper also
potentiates the toxicity of Aβ to neuronal cell cultures,7
which may be related to soluble oligomeric species generated by oxidation and covalent cross-linking of Aβ side
chains.4,5 Disease-modifying strategies based upon the rational design of therapeutics that inhibit the formation of
toxic Aβ species as well as restoring metal homeostasis
would be facilitated by detailed knowledge of the Cu2þ/Aβ
interface.8However, until recently, limited consensus on any
of the Cu2þ/Aβ coordination modes could be obtained.

путем скоординированной редукции бивалентного катиона меди в одновалентный катион меди с сопутствующим окислением других молекул и фрагментов, таких как тиолы, аскорбиновая кислота, жирв и боковые цепи БА. Бивалентный катион меди также потенциирует токсичность БА по отношению к нейронным клеточным структурам, это может быть связано с растворимыми олигомерными молекулами, произведенными окислением и ковалентным перекрестным сцеплением боковых цепей БА. Чтобы изменить ход СА путем рационального дизайна терапевтических агентов, уменьшить токсичность БА и восстановить металлический гомеостаз, нужно детально знать место биндинга БА с катионами меди. Но до сих пор знаний об этом месте было мало.

2. Defining the Cu2þ/Aβ Coordination Sphere:
The Problems

Определение сферы координации бивалентного катиона меди (БКМ) с БА: Задачи

Похоже на другие металлопротеиды, доступны множественные типы координации БКМ с БА на нормальном физиологическом уровне ph. Это ясно исходит из ph-зависимого равновесия между двумя различными молекулярными структурами, обычно обозначаемыми как "компонент 1" и "компонент 2", которые можно идентифицировать методом исследования спектра гладковолнового ЭПР (ГВ ЭПР) множества БКМ-БА комлексов. Парамагнетический ЯМР показывает на участие всех трех гистидиновых остатков БА при высокоспецифичной (высокоафинной) координации с БКМ, но способ, с помощью которого они координируются вместе с потенциальным взаимодействием N-конца, карбоксилированным кислородом боковой цепи Асп1, Глу3 и Асп7, Глу11 остатков и фенольным кислородом Тир10 и карбонильным кислородом CdO остается неясным. Предложенные экваториальные лигандные сферы для компонента 1 включают {NH2D1, NImH6, NImH13, NImH14}, 
{COOD1, NImH6, NImH13,NImH14}, {NH2D1, O, NImH6, NImH13} и {NH2D1, COO,NImH13, NImH14}. Похожим образом, лигандные сферы для компонента 2: {NH2D1, NImH6, NImH13,NImH14} и {NH2D1, N, CdO, NImH6}. В иных случаях было обнаружено лишь участие лигандов депротонированного амидного азота основной цепи.


Similar to other metalloproteins, more than one Cu2þ coordination mode is accessible to Aβ at physiological pH. This
was clear from the pH-dependent equilibrium between two
distinct species, commonly designated as “component I” and
“component II”, that could be identified by continuous-wave
electron paramagnetic resonance (CW-EPR) spectra of a
variety of Cu2þ/Aβ complexes (Figure 1C).915 Paramagnetic
NMR implicated the participation of all three His residues of
Aβ in high-affinity Cu2þ coordination,9,14,16 but the manner
in which they coordinated together with the potential involvement of the amino terminus (NH2),1014 the side chain
carboxylate oxygen (COO) of Asp1, Glu3, Asp7, and
Glu11,9,10,14,17 the phenolic oxygen of Tyr10,18 and a backbone carbonyl oxygen (CdO)10 remained unresolved. Proposed equatorial ligand spheres for component I included
{NH2
D1, NIm
H6, NIm
H13, NIm
H14},
12 {COO D1, NIm
H6, NIm
H13,
NIm
H14},
14 {NH2
D1, O, NIm
H6, NIm
H13},
13 and {NH2
D1, COO,
NIm
H13, NIm
H14}.
10 For component II, {NH2
D1, NIm
H6, NIm
H13,
NIm
H14}
14 and {NH2
D1, N, CdO, NIm
H6}
10 ligand spheres
had been proposed, while in other cases participation of
deprotonated backbone amide nitrogen (Nam) ligands was
only inferred.12 In some instances, coordination near pH 7.4
was examined without accounting for the presence of more
than one coordination mode, including EXAFS,17 paramagnetic NMR,16 and electron spin echo envelope modulation
(ESEEM) studies.19
In addition to being able to delineate different coordination modes, the EPR spectroscopic parameters g )and A )(Cu)
(Figure 1C) have commonly been used to infer the number of
nitrogen and oxygen ligands in Cu2þ/Aβ complexes,10,1214
although the relationship is at best qualitative in practice.20,21 Combining such information with complementary
methods such as UVvis and circular dichroism provides

В некоторых случаях, координация около значения ph 7.4 была исследована без учета возможности множественных режимов координации БКМ и БА, эти случаи включают исследования при помощи методов EXAFS, парамагнетического ЯМР и электрон-спин эхо-энвелопная модуляция. Вдобавок к возможности разделять различные режимы взаимодействия БКМ и БА, выведенные при помощи метода ЭПР спектроскопические параметры g-collinear(Cu) и A-collinear(Cu) были широко использованы для выведения количества азотистых и кислородных лигандов в БКМ-БА комплексах, но взаимодействие между этими лигандами и БКМ в лучшем случае качественного типа. Комбинируя эту информацию с комплементарными методами, такими как UVvis и циркулярный дихроизм предоставляет

additional information about the type of ligands involved by
identifying dd and ligand-to-metal charge transfer transitions, but assigning such transitions to a specific coordination mode when many modes overlap remains difficult.
To identify the residues involved, point mutations
or chemical modifications have frequently been introduced,10,12,13,15,22 with the aim of attributing any spectral
changes to a direct role of the modified residue in Cu2þ
coordination. However, mutating or blocking a coordinating
residue of the native complex will cause a major rearrangement of the first coordination sphere to replace the lost
ligand while counterintuitively resulting in only minor spectral changes if the blocked or mutated ligand is replaced by
another of the same type.12,22 Mutations and other modifications may also alter the coordination environment without the affected residue being directly coordinated to the
metal ion.

дополнительную информацию о типе лигандов, включенных в БКМ-БА взаимодействие (ББВ), путем диполь-дипольных и лиганд-метал переносов заряда, но конклюзивно соотнести такие переносы заряда с конкретным режимом ББВ - остается сложной задачей. Чтобы понять, какие конкретно аминокислотные остатки участвуют в ББВ, применялись пойнт-мутации и химическая модификация БА. Однако, мутации или блокирование взаимодействующих остатков вводят большое перераспределение в первую координационную сферу для компенсации утерянного лиганда, в то же время на спектре, несмотря на контринтуитивность, это отражается незначительно, если даже заменить один остаток на другой, но такого же типа. Мутации и модификации также могут изменить координационное окружение, хотя измененный остаток вообще не участвовал в интерфейсе ББВ.

3. Defining the Cu2þ/Aβ Coordination Sphere:
The Solution
A superior method for studying Cu2þ coordination of Aβ is to
introduce site-specific isotopic labels to the surrounding nuclei
and examine the resulting spectral changes using EPR methods, which directly probe the electronnuclear interactions.
The theory and applications of EPR, in particular CW-EPR,
ESEEM, and electronnuclear double resonance (ENDOR)
are described in comprehensive texts,21,23 and the EPR of
Cu2þ complexes and proteins has also been reviewed.24,25
Using CW-EPR, the goal is to resolve and observe changes in
the metalligand superhyperfine (shf) pattern (Figure 1C)
that accompany a change in both the nuclear spin I and
magnetic moment gn upon varying the isotopic content of
a specific nucleus. Much the same way one aims to infer the
coordination of specific residues by observing spectral
changes (e.g., in g|| and A||(Cu)) upon introducing a point
mutation, this can be more definitively achieved by observing spectral changes (e.g., in the shf structure of CW-EPR
spectra, or in the nuclear frequencies in ESEEM and ENDOR
spectra) following introduction of a site specific isotopic
label. The isotopic labeling approach is more sensitive to
pH dependent changes in ligand environment and does not
perturb the native structure of the metalprotein complex.
Its utility has been demonstrated in the study of the Cu2þ
coordination environment of the prion protein (PrP) octarepeat fragment, with its accuracy in this instance being
verified by X-ray crystallography.26 Reference 26 affords
an excellent review of the application of EPR and isotopic
labeling to the structure and function of Cu2þ coordination

Определение координационной сферы ББВ: Решение.

Выигрышный метод для изучения ББВ - ввести сайт-специфичные изотопные метки в окружающие ядра и изучить спектральные изменения ЭПР, при котором непосредственно измеряются электрон-ядерные взаимодействия. Используя ГВ ЭПР требуется разрешить и найти изменения в метал-лигандном супергипердробном орнаменте, которые сопутствуют  изменению как в ядерном спине 1 так и в магнитном моменте gn, путем варьирования изотопного содержимого отдельных ядер.  При ЭПР с метками, мы также можем наблюдать изменения спектра, как и в случае с введением пойнт-мутаций, но вместо пойнт-мутаций мы вводим изотопные метки и, в отличие от пойнт-мутаций, введение меток не может радикально изменить среду и окружение, при которых происходит ББВ. Также изотопные метки чувствительны к изменениям pH.
